---
layout: post
title: "Anatomy, Physiology, and Kinesiology in the Classroom"
date: 2016-12-29
excerpt: "In order to begin understanding how yoga can aid with mental function, it is important to notice that there are already known parallels between the acts that make up yoga and improved mental function."
tags: [yoga, health, anatomy, physiology, kinesiology, instruction]
comments: true
---



### Yoga in Western society is often perceived as a primarily physical practice.
One is believed to move between a series of forms, or asanas, in order to obtain strength and flexibility. To believe that yoga impacts the body without also impacting the mind, however, is to make an error in judgement. The practice of yoga is an incorporation of breath, posture, and focus, and as such, a practitioner can expect to find improvement both in their body and mind. This means that yoga can be used as a means of therapy for physical ailments, such as prior injuries, but also for mental maladies, such as anxiety and depression. This essay will focus on the mental benefits of a sustained yogic practice.

In order to begin understanding how yoga can aid with mental function, it is important to notice that there are already known parallels between the acts that make up yoga and improved mental function. Deep breathing is already a well documented and doctor recommend solution for acute anxiety, and is regularly employed as part of a treatment regimen for those suffering from Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). Regular exercise has been proven to be an effective elevator of happiness. Meditation, the practice of calming and focusing your mind, has been shown to carry over the benefit of obtaining calm, focused attention more easily and frequently elsewhere in life.

If yoga is the combination of intentional deep breathing conjoined with physical exercise and a focused mind, then it is fair to assume that the aforementioned benefits of exercise, deep breathing, and meditation would carry over and perhaps even by amplified when combined into a unified, regular practice.

### To better understand how a physical practice, (in our case, movement through asanas,) can have an impact on the mind, it is necessary to see that the body and the mind are not separate entities. 
For example, our bodies store and exhibit emotions in places other than the mind. Someone in an uncomfortable, anxious, or threatened state will typically have hunched shoulders and shallow breathing. A person experiencing a great deal of grief will sometimes go into convulsions, which we call sobbing, and their eyes will begin to water from the accumulation of what we call tears, the product of crying. Inversely, a person in a relaxed state will have relaxed shoulders. Our emotions do not process only in the mind; they are a part of the body as well, and they exhibit themselves in our bodies. Furthermore, this correlation is reciprocal, meaning an anxious person may develop tight muscles, poor posture, and short breathing, which will in turn feed back into their anxious state. The inverse would then also be true here. A person with a relaxed (but focused) mind will likely have a physical state that will provide better breathing as well as gain the benefits of appearing relaxed, which will carry with it a subconscious self-benefit as well as an inherently more positive perception from others. Remember: sixty percent of all human communication is nonverbal. In many ways, how we hold ourselves says more than our actual choice of words.

A mental state can influence the body in such a way as to produce physical manifestations, but it can also alter the chemical composition of the brain. The brain is constantly rewiring itself, forming new neural pathways. This means that a person who thinks positive thoughts will, in the process of thinking those positive thoughts, program the brain in such a way that they will be more likely to think positively in the future. The same holds true again for the inverse. A mind full of negative thoughts will develop in such a way as to be conducive to negative thought, in a very real, physical, biochemical sense.

Yoga can be seen as a controlled stress environment. In this environment, we practice our asanas, which, if done properly, should present some physical and mental challenges for ourselves. Through the act of being present with these challenges, the “controlled stress environment” of yoga, the yogi programs the mind to handle stress through calm, focus, and deep breathing. While this is useful for future yoga practices, these new pathways of calm and focus also follow the yogi off the mat and through their daily life, whether they are conscious of it or not. In this way yogic training becomes training for many other stressful environments, whether the challenges presented are physical, mental, or both simultaneously.

I frequently hear yoga instructors advising to take the lessons learned in the classroom outside of the classroom and into daily practice, but for the beginner it can be hard to grasp what this means exactly. Allow me to append to this advisement an observation: A yogi who practices with calm, focus, patience, and deep breathing will leave their practice biochemically predisposed to using the same tactics elsewhere more frequently in their life. The benefit is automatic. One can increase this benefit further by understanding how and why this works, but the benefit will nonetheless be there whether or not a yogi grasps the full weight of their training.

A study was done on the brains of yoga practitioners using MRI to study the effects of a sustained yoga practice. The summarization of the study is as follows:

“We used magnetic resonance imaging to compare age-related gray matter (GM) decline in yogis and controls. We also examined the effect of increasing yoga experience and weekly practice on GM volume and assessed which aspects of weekly practice contributed most to brain size. Controls displayed the well documented age-related global brain GM decline while yogis did not, suggesting that yoga contributes to protect the brain against age-related decline. Years of yoga experience correlated mostly with GM volume differences in the left hemisphere (insula, frontal operculum, and orbitofrontal cortex) suggesting that yoga tunes the brain toward a parasympatically driven mode and positive states. The number of hours of weekly practice correlated with GM volume in the primary somatosensory cortex/superior parietal lobule (S1/SPL), precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex (PCC), hippocampus, and primary visual cortex (V1). Commonality analyses indicated that the combination of postures and meditation contributed the most to the size of the hippocampus, precuneus/PCC, and S1/SPL while the combination of meditation and breathing exercises contributed the most to V1 volume. Yoga’s potential neuroprotective effects may provide a neural basis for some of its beneficial effects.”

Another study conducted in 2008 shows that a regular yoga routine can lead to the brain developing more efficient pain coping mechanisms:

“Researchers at the University of Utah presented preliminary results from a study of varied participants' responses to pain. They note that people who have a poorly regulated response to stress are also more sensitive to pain. Their subjects were 12 experienced yoga practitioners, 14 people with fibromyalgia (a condition many researchers consider a stress-related illness that is characterized by hypersensitivity to pain), and 16 healthy volunteers.

When the three groups were subjected to more or less painful thumbnail pressure, the participants with fibromyalgia — as expected — perceived pain at lower pressure levels compared with the other subjects. Functional MRIs showed they also had the greatest activity in areas of the brain associated with the pain response. In contrast, the yoga practitioners had the highest pain tolerance and lowest pain-related brain activity during the MRI. The study underscores the value of techniques, such as yoga, that can help a person regulate their stress and, therefore, pain responses.”

### The evidence that the acts involved with yoga provide benefit to the mind are overwhelming, to say the least. Over time, we can routinely scan the brain of a yoga practitioner through routine practice and, when comparing to a control, see multiple areas of the brain that correspond to yogic practice develop before our very eyes.

These studies confirm what the great thinkers in yoga have been saying all along. Yoga practice carries its benefits to other facets of life. Yoga is a physical and mental practice, and it will carry physical and mental benefit both on and off the mat.

A student of the practice of yoga should strive to understand that our bodies are a unified, cooperating system. While we may have categorizations for certain body parts and their functions, we are also, from a physical perspective, a single, living organism. We sometimes make the mistake of separating our body into hemispheres. Particularly in Western society, citizens have a tendency of thinking of their heads as separate entities from their bodies, and then perceiving themselves as experiencing life through their heads while their bodies merely carry them through life. This is a detached existence, and it is best to try to part with this way of thinking. We have already established that the mind and the body are not isolated; what affects one affects the other. Through this understanding we can infer that mental practice can benefit the body and physical practice can benefit the mind. Break down the perceived separation between mind and body if it exists, and one will find themselves more present and focused in the world around them. If a whole population were to practice this unification of mind and body, I believe we would find our rates of depression and anxiety, our number of prescriptions, and our rate of suicide all dropping dramatically.



http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnhum.2015.00281/full
"Neuroprotective Effects of Yoga Practice: Age-, Experience-, and Frequency-dependent Plasticity." Frontiers. N.p., n.d. Web. 03 Nov. 2016.

http://www.health.harvard.edu/mind-and-mood/yoga-for-anxiety-and-depression
Publications, Harvard Health. "Yoga for Anxiety and Depression - Harvard Health." Harvard Health. N.p., n.d. Web. 03 Nov. 2016.